PEP 735: Dependency Groups in pyproject.toml (#3541)
python/peps: peps/pep-0735.rst

Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/39233
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 20-Nov-2023
Post-History: `20-Nov-2023 <https://discuss.python.org/t/39233>`__, `14-Nov-2023 <https://discuss.python.org/t/29684>`__

Abstract
========

This PEP specifies a mechanism for storing package requirements in
pyproject.toml files such that it is not included in any built distribution of
the project.

This is suitable for creating named groups of dependencies, similar to
``requirements.txt`` files, which launchers, IDEs, and other tools can find and
identify by name.

The feature defined here is referred to as "Dependency Groups".

Motivation
==========

There are two major use-cases for which the Python community has no
standardized answer:

* How should development dependencies be defined for packages?

* How should dependencies be defined for projects which do not build
  distributions (non-package projects)?

In the absence of any standard, two known workflow tools, PDM and Poetry, have
defined their own solutions for Dependency Groups to address the first of these
two needs. Their definitions are very similar to one another, although PDM

> structures them much more similarly to extras than Poetry does.

Author: I've linked to the section in Dependency Specifiers ( https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/dependency-specifiers/ ) which describes extras. I just noticed that this might not be the right place to point. Should I use https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/core-metadata/#provides-extra-multiple-use ? Or maybe there's some better place to link? I really want to point at the specification for `project.optional-dependencies` but I didn't find it easily.

  project be built into a wheel.
* A library which builds a distribution, but has a variety of testing and
  development environments it wishes to declare. Some of these rely on the
  library's own dependencies (``test`` and ``typing`` environments) while
  others do not (``docs`` and ``lint`` environments).
* A data science project which consists of multiple scripts on the same suite
  of core libraries (e.g. ``numpy``, ``pandas``, ``matplotlib``), and which
  also has additional libraries, sometimes conflicting, for specific scripts
  (e.g. ``scikit-learn==1.3.2`` for one script and ``scikit-learn==0.24.2`` for
  another).
* *Input data* to a lockfile generator. Because there is no standardized
  lockfile format, it is still the prerogative of tools like ``poetry`` and
  ``pip-compile`` to describe their own formats. However, it should be possible
  for the data from this PEP to be used as an input to these tools.
  Furthermore, tools may define their own structures and conventions such that
  the generated lockfiles can be referenced by the names of their originating
  dependency groups in ``pyproject.toml``.

> * *Input data* to a ``tox``, ``nox``, or ``hatch`` environment, as can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Input data* to a tox, Nox, or Hatch environment, as can
```

  currently be achieved, for example, with ``deps = -r requirements.txt`` in
  ``tox.ini``. These tools will need to add additional options for processing
  Dependency Groups.

> * Embeddable data for ``pyproject.toml`` within a script (as in PEP 723). This

Reviewer: This will autolink it:
```suggestion
* Embeddable data for ``pyproject.toml`` within a script (as in :pep:`723`). This
```

  PEP does not define exactly how PEP 723 should be modified, but being
  consumable by that interface is a stated goal.

> * IDE discovery of requirements data. e.g. VSCode could look for a dependency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* IDE discovery of requirements data. e.g. VS Code could look for a dependency
```

  group named ``test`` to use when running tests.

Regarding Poetry and PDM Dependency Groups
------------------------------------------

> Poetry and PDM already offers a feature which each calls "Dependency Groups",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Poetry and PDM already offer a feature which each calls "Dependency Groups",
```

a non-goal.

Dependency Groups are not Hidden Extras
---------------------------------------

One could be forgiven for thinking that Dependency Groups are just extras which
go unpublished.

However, there are two major features they have which distinguish them from
extras:

* they support non-package projects

* installation of a dependency group does not imply installation of a package's
  dependencies (or the package itself)

Specification
=============

This PEP defines a new section (table) in ``pyproject.toml`` files named
``requirements``. The ``requirements`` table contains exactly one key,
``packages``, which is a table. All other keys in ``requirements`` are reserved
for future use.

The ``packages`` table contains an arbitrary number of user-defined keys, each of
which has, as its value, a list of requirements specifiers (defined below).
These keys must match the following regular expression:
``[a-z0-9][a-z0-9-]*[a-z0-9]``. Meaning that they must be all lower-case
alphanumerics, with ``-`` allowed only in the middle, and at least
two characters long. These requirements are chosen so that the normalization

> rules used for pypi package names do not apply, as the names are already

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
rules used for PyPI package names are unnecessary as the names are already
```

> rules used for pypi package names do not apply, as the names are already

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rules used for PyPI package names do not apply, as the names are already
```

normalized.

> Requirements specifiers will use a definition which extends PEP 508. Therefore,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Requirements specifiers will use a definition which extends :pep:`508`. Therefore,
```

> Requirements specifiers will use a definition which extends PEP 508. Therefore,

Reviewer 2: It's better to reference the specs at packaging.python.org rather than individual PEPs.

Author: I'll do a pass for this. I've just incorporated the stylistic fix feedback to use the `:pep:` sphinx role, which I didn't know about. But I'd like to move any PEP numbers into footnote references, and refer to spec docs if that's the preferred point of reference.

Reviewer: Generally, we prefer inline links rather than footnotes (they save a click), unless you have something extra to say in the footnote.

Perhaps something like "the X specification (PEP XXX)"?

Author: I've done a pass to try to ensure that PEP numbers never appear without a descriptive name, so I'm marking this resolved, but I wouldn't be surprised if this can be refined further.

it is first necessary to define a string format, a "PEP 735 Dependency". These

> are defined as strings in one of the three following formats:

Reviewer: I count four bullets?
```suggestion
are defined as strings in one of the four following formats:
```

Or don't specify the number:

```suggestion
are defined as strings in one of the following formats:
```

Author: Better not to specify -- it's shorter and clearly I'm bad at counting! :sweat_smile: 
(Originally I did not specify the `.` on its own as meaningful, but then I circled back and added it.)

I'll have to apply this in a moment -- Brett's suggestion below can't be applied simultaneously with this fix in GitHub.

> Requirements specifiers will use a definition which extends PEP 508. Therefore,
> it is first necessary to define a string format, a "PEP 735 Dependency". These
> are defined as strings in one of the three following formats:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Requirements specifiers will use a definition based on PEP 508. This PEP also
proposes extending the syntax to define a new string format, a
"PEP 735 Dependency". These are defined as strings in one of the three
following formats:
```

* a PEP 508 specification, e.g., ``numpy>1``
* a comma-delimited list of Dependency Group names, enclosed in square

>   brackets, e.g., ``[test,docs]`` to refer to other Dependency Groups named
>   ``test`` and ``docs``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  brackets, e.g., ``[test,docs]`` to refer to other Dependency Groups named
  ``test`` and ``docs`` as specified in ``[requirements.packages]``
```

* a single dot, ``.``, which refers to the current project as a package

>   (similar to ``pip install .``)

Reviewer 2: As in you're referring to `project.dependencies`? If so then I would explicitly state that and link to the spec for `project.dependencies` at packaging.python.org .

Author: I had meant for it to mean installation of `project.dependencies` + the local package.
My thought was that a dependency group using `.` or `.[foo]` should get the same result as `pip install .` or `pip install '.[foo]'`.

So I think it's slightly broader. Is there a good, more precise term for this?

(And we should handle whether or not the PEP recommends editable installs, but I'm inclined to think it's better to have some expectation about whether or not it's the equivalent of `pip install` or `pip install -e`.)

Author: The latest version of the spec replaces this whole idea with an object specification for paths. I think it's a lot more explicit, so I feel comfortable marking this resolved, but obviously the new draft will need review.

* a single dot, followed by square brackets enclosing a list of extra names,
  which refers to the current project as a package including some extras, e.g.,

>   ``.[mysql]`` to refer to the current package with its ``mysql`` extra

Reviewer 2: Is this meant to infer both `project.dependencies` and `project.optional-dependencies`? If so then I would explicit about that and link to the relevant specs at packaging.python.org .

Author: Yes, my intent is for this usage to behave like an extra being installed, so it must include `project.dependencies`.
I'll try a rewrite of this point to clarity.

Author: The draft I've just finished completely removes the `.[extra]` syntax, in favor of `{path = ".", extras = ["extra"]}`.

Requirement specifiers can now be defined as one of the following:

* A string, which is a valid PEP 735 Dependency Specifier. e.g., ``numpy>1``
* An object, which has exactly one key, ``spec``, which is a valid PEP 735

>   Dependency Spec. e.g., ``{spec = "numpy>1"}``

Reviewer 2: Where did this come from? The phrasing of, "can now be defined" suggests you already discussed all the relevant details, but this is the first mention of anything well beyond requirement specifiers.

And what's the motivation for this object addition? Nowhere in the motivation or rationale did anything get put forth which would suggest this is necessary. I would argue it goes against "the desire for this format to be as simple and learnable as possible" (maybe this was discussed on discuss.python.org and I haven't read the discussion yet?).

Author: > The phrasing of, "can now be defined" suggests you already discussed all the relevant details, but this is the first mention of anything well beyond requirement specifiers.

Yeah, bad/misleading phrasing.
I've cut it down to "Requirement specifiers are one of the following:" for now. (will push a new rev shortly)

> And what's the motivation for this object addition? Nowhere in the motivation or rationale did anything get put forth which would suggest this is necessary. I would argue it goes against "the desire for this format to be as simple and learnable as possible" (maybe this was discussed on discuss.python.org and I haven't read the discussion yet?).

This is my own invention. It's being discussed on discourse now because I've just introduced it, but you're not missing any background discussion.

I missed it from the Rationale section -- I need to add it. Even if the object format gets nixed and we/I remove it, the current text is less coherent without including relevant rationale.
My goal was to specify how tools should behave if new fields are added in the future, and to explicitly make it possible for new fields to be added by starting with the string/object duality.
My concern was that if the object format isn't introduced from the outset, it can't be safely introduced later without causing a lot of breakage/churn.
If it's built in from the start, fields can be added over time without having to come back and alter this specification.

The format is inspired by [PEP 633](https://peps.python.org/pep-0633/). Reading the discussion of that PEP, it seemed to me that it was rejected largely because (1) it proposed many fields at once, and (2) it uses the PEP 440 directly for `version`, rather than using full PEP 508 strings.

I might be mistaken in this whole line of thinking. I can be convinced. But I was worried about leaving this out of the spec and potentially regretting it later if people want support for pip's `--hash` option, in particular.

Author: Over the past two iterations of this document, I think the changes have evolved enough that this particular comment can be marked resolved.

Even if `only-deps` and `editable` are removed, I would like to keep path dependencies and includes declared as objects. As with everything, I'm open to convincing arguments, but for the purposes of this first draft, I think the PEP does a reasonable job of arguing in favor of objects and against a special syntax.

Any additional keys in a requirement specifier object are reserved for future
use.

The following is an example of a ``pyproject.toml`` section which uses this to
define four dependency groups: ``test``, ``docs``, ``typing``, and
``typing-test``:

.. code:: toml

    [requirements.packages]
    test = ["pytest", "coverage", "."]
    docs = ["sphinx", "sphinx-rtd-theme"]
    typing = ["mypy", "types-requests", ".[types]"]
    typing-test = ["[typing,test]", "useful-types"]

Note how ``test`` and ``typing`` are able to refer to the current package
while ``docs`` does not. This reflects the ability of Dependency Groups to be used
in the same manner as extras, adding to dependencies, or completely
independently. ``typing-test`` is defined as a union of two existing groups,
plus an additional package. ``typing`` includes an extra, ``types``.

Implementation Requirements
---------------------------

Build backends MUST NOT include dependency group data in built distributions.

Tools which support Dependency Groups MUST support both string and object
representations of requirements.

When unrecognized keys are encountered in requirement specifiers or the

> ``requirements`` table, tools MUST NOT fail. They MAY emit warnings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``requirements`` table, tools MUST NOT fail. They SHOULD emit warnings.
```

I'm not quite sure how I feel about the "MUST NOT fail" part. Why should people be allowed to specify invalid group names?

Author: IMO, if we aren't comfortable with the "MUST NOT fail" semantics, we should drop the object specification from this version of the spec. To me, the two only make sense together -- if tools are able to fail on new keys being added, I'm not sure anything is gained by including the object format from the outset.

Author: Having reread the comment about "surprise success" below and thought about it a moment more, I'm not sure I'm as firm in this belief as I was only a few minutes ago. Even so, I think that if the "MUST NOT" gets removed, we/I should strongly consider removing the object specification.

Author: Since all of the language about handling unrecognized keys has been removed, I'm marking this resolved.

> When installing the current package (``.``) from a dependency group, tools
> SHOULD prefer editable installs over non-editable installs. They MAY provide
> users with options to configure this behavior.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When installing the current package (``.``) from a dependency group, tools
SHOULD prefer editable installs over non-editable installs. They MAY provide
users with options to configure this behavior.
```

I personally don't like the "SHOULD" part of this. For instance, I don't use a `src/` layout typically, so an editable install is an unnecessary for me and all I really need is the dependencies installed. See https://github.com/pypa/pip/issues/11440 for a whole discussion about wanting to avoid the whole editable install step.

Author: Paul Moore raised this on Discourse as well. I hadn't realized that wanting to install `project.dependencies` without an install of the package was a use-case of importance.

I need to think more about how to specify this all. It seems to me that the things you might want to include are
- the current package (including `project.dependencies`)
- `project.dependencies` (sans the current package)
- any extra from `project.optional-dependencies` (IMO, *always* implicitly including `project.dependencies`)

If you _do_ use a `src/` layout, it makes a big difference if you include the current package, so I wouldn't want to omit it in all cases.

Author: The current version defines `only_deps` as a key in the object spec, taking direct inspiration from the pip thread, and `editable` as an explicit flag. The result is for the most part easier to reason about, and it forced me to formalize a lot of previously unspecified behaviors.

When `editable` is absent, this draft states explicitly that tools may choose their default/preference.

Between these new fields, I think these concerns are mostly addressed. At least, it's different enough from the earlier draft that I think we should have a new thread to discuss it further.

Use of Dependency Groups
------------------------

Tools which support Dependency Groups are expected to provide new options and
interfaces to allow users to install from Dependency Groups. Implementations
may wish to treat them similarly to their current treatments of
``requirements.txt`` files, or more similarly to extras.

No syntax is defined for expressing the dependency group of a package, for two
reasons:

* it would not be valid to refer to the dependency groups of a third-party
  package from pypi (because the data is defined to be unpublished)

* there is not guaranteed to be a current package for dependency groups -- part
  of their purpose is to support non-package projects

> For example, a possible ``pip`` interface for installing dependency groups

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, a possible pip interface for installing dependency groups
```

would be:

.. code:: shell

    pip install --dependency-groups=test,typing

Note that this is only an example. This PEP does not declare any requirements
for how tools support the installation of Dependency Groups.

Reference Implementation
========================

> TODO! STUB!
> 
> Planned reference implementation:
> A very simple "environment manager" which can be used to build virtualenvs from
> specified Dependency Groups. It will therefore need to fully support parsing of
> Dependency Groups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is currently no reference implementation/consumer of this specification.
```

Author: Okay, I wasn't sure if I should describe what I plan to add or not.
Perhaps a reference implementation isn't important in this case? I had expected it would be valuable to include one.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

> At time of writing, the ``requirements`` table is reserved for use by PEPs,
> meaning that this lays claim to a previously unused namespace.
> There should therefore be no direct backwards compatibility concerns.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At time of writing, the ``requirements`` namespace within a
``pyproject.toml`` file is unused. Since the top-level namespace is
reserved for use only by standards specified at packaging.python.org,
there should be no direct backwards compatibility concerns.
```

Future Compatiiblity
--------------------

This PEP defines explicit behaviors for tools when encountering unknown keys
which must be followed in order to remain spec-compliant. These behaviors are
meant to ensure that future PEPs can extend the data with very clear

> expectations about how existing tools will behave.

Reviewer 2: But that could also allow for surprise "success" when unexpected things are encountered. Compare that to knowing whether your tool supports a newer standard based on whether something succeeded or failed (or at least warned you).

Author: I'm not sure what the best course to chart here is. We could leave it up to the tools to decide how they want to handle unknown keys and only go so far as to say that they "SHOULD warn" on unrecognized keys. It's weaker as a specification, but maybe that's for the best in this case?

Reviewer 2: It's ultimately up to you as the PEP author which one you think will be the best outcome while getting the PEP accepted.

Author: I looked a lot at how PEP 621 phrased the keys and values in its defined tables and tried to follow that model, which is generally to be a bit more explicit about what's a requirement and not to say anything unnecessary about unspecified fields. :crossed_fingers: that I got the balance right.

Security Implications
=====================

This PEP introduces new syntaxes and data formats for specifying dependency
information in projects. However, it does not introduce newly specified
mechanisms for handling or resolving dependencies.

It therefore does not carry security concerns other than those inherent in any
tools which may already be used to install dependencies -- i.e. malicious
dependencies may be specified here, just as they may be specified in
``requirements.txt`` files.

How to Teach This
=================

This feature should be referred to by its canonical name, "Dependency Groups".

The basic form of usage should be taught as a variant on typical

> ``requirements.txt`` data. PEP 508 package specifiers can be added to a named

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``requirements.txt`` data. :pep:`508` package specifiers can be added to a named
```

> list. Rather than asking ``pip`` to install from a ``requirements.txt`` file,
> either ``pip`` or a relevant workflow tool will install from a named Dependency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
list. Rather than asking pip to install from a ``requirements.txt`` file,
either pip or a relevant workflow tool will install from a named Dependency
```

Group.

> For new python users, they may be taught directly to create a section in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For new Python users, they may be taught directly to create a section in
```

``pyproject.toml`` containing their dependency groups, similarly to how they
are currently taught to use ``pyproject.toml``.

Rejected Ideas
==============

Why not define python-requires as part of the requirements table?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

> Discussion around PEP 722 and PEP 723, as well as discussions of projects which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Discussion around :pep:`722` and :pep:`723,` as well as discussions of projects which
```

do not produce wheels, have often raised the need to define the python version
which will be used.

This PEP explicitly does not define such a key -- doing so must define
interoperability semantics with respect to the existing packaging-oriented
python-requires key.
It is treated as out-of-scope for the sake of simplicity.

The Dependency Groups data can be defined here and intentionally leaves space
for the addition of new keys in ``[requirements]`` for future PEPs.

Why not define each Dependency Group as a table?
------------------------------------------------

If the goal is to allow for future expansion, then defining each Dependency
Group as a subtable, thus enabling us to attach future keys to each group,
allows for the greatest future flexibility.

However, it also makes the structure nested more deeply, and therefore harder
to teach and learn. One of the goals of this PEP is to be an easy replacement
for many ``requirements.txt`` use-cases.

Why not restrict dependencies to PEP 508 only?
----------------------------------------------

> There are valid use-cases for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are valid use-cases for:
```

* including one dependency group in another
* including the current package (if the project is a package)
* including the current package with extras (if the project is a package)

These are not satisfiable without some expansion of syntax beyond what is

> possible with PEP 508.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
possible with :pep:`508`.
```

It is currently unclear which options will be the most necessary and beneficial.

Certain problems, e.g. package hashing, are the domain of lockfiles.
The data in this PEP is meant to be lockfile *input*, not necessarily lockfile *output*.
Therefore, hashing should not be privileged, nor should other options.

The PEP defines space for future expansion of the data format and mandates that
tools support and parse it such that expansion will be a non-breaking change.

Why not restrict dependency specifications to strings only?
-----------------------------------------------------------

Failing to establish the object format at this stage would lead to a breaking
change if it were ever introduced.
Rather than having a smooth degradation path, users would experience breakage
if the object format were introduced and only some tools supported it.

Why is the table not named ``[run]``, ``[dependency_groups]``, ...?
-------------------------------------------------------------------

There are many possible names for this concept.
It will have to live alongside the already existing ``[project.dependencies]``
and ``[project.optional-dependencies]`` tables, and possibly a new

> ``[external]`` dependency table as well (at time of writing, PEP 725 is in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``[external]`` dependency table as well (at time of writing, :pep:`725` is in
```

progress).

``[run]`` was a leading proposal in earlier discussions, but its proposed usage
centered around a single set of runtime dependencies. This PEP explicitly
outlines multiple groups of dependencies, which makes ``[run]`` a less
appropriate fit -- this is not just dependency data for a specific runtime
context, but for multiple contexts.

``[dependency_groups]`` is a reasonable name, but it fails to namespace the
dependency group data under a related umbrella term. As a result, it would be
harder to extend in the future to include other data, such as python version
requirements.

.. note::

>     No name has been declared final yet.

Reviewer 2: This would make the topic an open issue then.

Author: Ah! I can make that update. I got confused about what that section was for (in the context of potential GitHub Issues).

> Why is ``pip``'s planned implementation of ``--only-deps`` not sufficient?
> --------------------------------------------------------------------------
> 
> ``pip`` currently has a feature on the roadmap to add an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why is pip's planned implementation of ``--only-deps`` not sufficient?
----------------------------------------------------------------------

pip currently has a feature on the roadmap to add an
```

`--only-deps flag <pip only-deps_>`_. This flag is intended to allow users to
install package dependencies and extras without installing the current package.

It does not address the needs of non-package projects, nor does it allow for
the installation of an extra without the package dependencies.

> Therefore, while it may be a useful feature for ``pip`` to pursue, it does not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, while it may be a useful feature for pip to pursue, it does not
```

PEP: 735
Title: Dependency Groups in pyproject.toml
Author: Stephen Rosen <sirosen0@gmail.com>

> Sponsor: Brett Cannon <brett@python.org>

Reviewer: Re: https://github.com/python/peps/pull/3541#issuecomment-1821729365 
```suggestion
Sponsor: Brett Cannon <brett@python.org>
PEP-Delegate: Paul Moore <p.f.moore@gmail.com>
```

PEP: 735
Title: Dependency Groups in pyproject.toml
Author: Stephen Rosen <sirosen0@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Brett Cannon <brett@python.org>
PEP-Delegate: Paul Moore <p.f.moore@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/39233
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Topic: Packaging
Created: 20-Nov-2023
Post-History: `14-Nov-2023 <https://discuss.python.org/t/29684>`__, `20-Nov-2023 <https://discuss.python.org/t/39233>`__

Abstract
========

This PEP specifies a mechanism for storing package requirements in
``pyproject.toml`` files such that it is not included in any built distribution of
the project.

This is suitable for creating named groups of dependencies, similar to
``requirements.txt`` files, which launchers, IDEs, and other tools can find and
identify by name.

The feature defined here is referred to as "Dependency Groups".

Motivation
==========

> There are two major use-cases for which the Python community has no

Author: I'm going to try to correct this not only using your suggestions in the PR, but also in my own head. I always thought this was a hyphenate, but this seems to be the mainstream way to spell this term.

* How should dependencies be defined for projects which do not build
  distributions (non-package projects)?

In the absence of any standard, two known workflow tools, PDM and Poetry, have
defined their own solutions for Dependency Groups to address the first of these
two needs. Their definitions are very similar to one another, although PDM
structures them much more similarly to extras than Poetry does.
Neither of them addresses the needs of non-package projects, and neither can be
referenced natively from other tools like ``tox``, ``nox``, or ``pip``.

There are two pre-existing solutions which are similar to this proposal: the
use of ``requirements.txt`` files and package extras.

Regarding ``requirements.txt``, many projects may define one or more of these files,
and may arrange them either at the project root (e.g. ``requirements.txt`` and
``test-requirements.txt``) or else in a directory (e.g.
``requirements/base.txt`` and ``requirements/test.txt``). However, there are
two major issues with the use of requirements files in this way:

* There is no standardized naming convention such that tools can discover or
  use these files by name.

> * ``requirementst.txt`` files are *not standardized*, but instead provide

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* ``requirements.txt`` files are *not standardized*, but instead provide
```

should be used to declare development dependencies.

Supported Project Types
-----------------------

This PEP aims to serve the needs of two distinct project types:

* libraries and other packages which want to define development dependencies

* projects which do not build distributions which want a standardized way to
  declare their dependency data

The Python packaging toolchain is oriented towards the production of wheel and
sdist files, containing project source for installation. However, not all
projects are designed or intended for this mode of distribution. Primary
examples include webapps (which often run from source), and data science
projects (which may start as collections of scripts and only later evolve
package structures). This PEP seeks to offer these projects a way to specify
their package dependencies in a way which is not constrained by the
requirements of distribution building -- for example, a data science project
does not need to declare a version or authors in order for these data to be
valid, nor does it need to define an installable package source tree.

Simultaneously, this PEP should benefit projects which *are* intended to build

> distributions. Because these requirements data are explicitly defined to not be

Author: I think the right rephrase will be "Because Dependency Groups are..." -- the issue here is an unclear antecedent.

I wouldn't call it _very_ awkward, but it's definitely a case in which my pedantic streak (insisting that "data are" and "datum is") doesn't match some pretty common colloquial English.

> distributions. Because these requirements data are explicitly defined to not be

Reviewer 4: Reading this sentence I don't know what "these data" refers back to. Maybe this:
```suggestion
distributions. Because dependency groups, as specified in this PEP, are explicitly defined to not be
```

> distributions. Because these requirements data are explicitly defined to not be

Author: I thought I fixed this line. I must have just missed it. :facepalm: 

Your edit is almost verbatim what I wanted to make this.

> included in any built distribution, two common use-cases are addressed by this

Author: I agree that "use cases" doesn't feel quite right for what's being described. I'll need to rephrase.

But for now, I'll incorporate this into the broad rewrite of "use-case(s)" to "use case(s)".

  of core libraries (e.g. ``numpy``, ``pandas``, ``matplotlib``), and which
  also has additional libraries, sometimes conflicting, for specific scripts
  (e.g. ``scikit-learn==1.3.2`` for one script and ``scikit-learn==0.24.2`` for
  another).
* *Input data* to a lockfile generator. Because there is no standardized
  lockfile format, it is still the prerogative of tools like ``poetry`` and
  ``pip-compile`` to describe their own formats. However, it should be possible
  for the data from this PEP to be used as an input to these tools.
  Furthermore, tools may define their own structures and conventions such that
  the generated lockfiles can be referenced by the names of their originating
  dependency groups in ``pyproject.toml``.
* *Input data* to a tox, Nox, or Hatch environment, as can
  currently be achieved, for example, with ``deps = -r requirements.txt`` in
  ``tox.ini``. These tools will need to add additional options for processing
  Dependency Groups.
* Embeddable data for ``pyproject.toml`` within a script (as in :pep:`723`). This
  PEP does not define exactly how PEP 723 should be modified, but being
  consumable by that interface is a stated goal.

> * IDE discovery of requirements data. e.g. VS Code could look for a dependency

Reviewer: I already corrected VSCode -> VS Code earlier :)

* https://code.visualstudio.com/
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Visual_Studio_Code

> * IDE discovery of requirements data. e.g. VS Code could look for a dependency

Reviewer 4: <img width="253" alt="Screenshot 2023-11-23 at 12 14 07 PM" src="https://github.com/python/peps/assets/906600/06146d0e-a387-4437-8694-bd9bf97470a8">

Indeed, that's what it calls itself, I guess I have been doing it wrong.

I'll edit my suggestion.

> * IDE discovery of requirements data. e.g. VS Code could look for a dependency

Author: I also learned here that it's "VS Code". :smile: 

Regarding the remaining suggestion, I think I should try to cut down `i.e.` and `e.g.` a bit. They're a bit of my writing style which -- like my excessive use of the em-dash :wink: -- might be a sign of a kind of laziness.

>   group named ``test`` to use when running tests.

Author: My original thought process/position was that this spec should not lay claim to or "reserve" any special names. Any valid Dependency Group name can be used by a user for whatever purpose they choose.

Conventions or even subsequent standards may assign meaning to specific well-known names.

I still believe that, but with some additional nuance. There are two usages of which I know in which having special names would be useful:
- `test` for use by IDEs. Brett has written about this in some of the past related threads -- I'd want to find his comments if we want more detail on this.
- `run` could satisfy PEP 723.

I would ideally like to include a section which recommends these two names for these two known scenarios and then leaves conventions around any further names open for the community. But I don't want to change the idea that PEP 735 defines only how you write down dependency groups, and any standardization of names is a separate problem -- anything in the PEP should be recommendations.

I don't know how to incorporate this thinking into the PEP. And this text should be clarified somehow regardless... But I'll need to look more carefully at how.

>   group named ``test`` to use when running tests.

Reviewer 4: Thanks. I think this can come up in the PEP's discussion thread, so marking this as resolved.

Regarding Poetry and PDM Dependency Groups
------------------------------------------

Poetry and PDM already offer a feature which each calls "Dependency Groups",
but using non-standard data belonging to the ``poetry`` and ``pdm`` tools.
(PDM also uses extras for some Dependency Groups, and overlaps the notion
heavily with extras.)

This PEP is not guaranteed to be a perfectly substitutable solution for the
same problem space for each tool. However, the ideas are extremely similar, and
it should be possible for Poetry and PDM to support at least some
PEP-735-standardized Dependency Group configurations using their own Dependency
Group nomenclature.

> A level of interoperability with Poetry and PDM is a goal of this PEP, but

Author: That's a good point. After the current round of edits I'm going to be doing what might be considered a full new draft to support some of these tools' features, and there _will_ be gaps which I should document.

    [requirements.packages]
    test = ["pytest", "coverage", "."]
    docs = ["sphinx", "sphinx-rtd-theme"]
    typing = ["mypy", "types-requests", ".[types]"]
    typing-test = ["[typing,test]", "useful-types"]

    [project.optional-dependencies]
    types = ["typing-extensions"]

Note how ``test`` and ``typing`` are able to refer to the current package
while ``docs`` does not. This reflects the ability of Dependency Groups to be used
in the same manner as extras, adding to dependencies, or completely
independently. ``typing-test`` is defined as a union of two existing groups,
plus an additional package. ``typing`` includes an extra, ``types``.

Implementation Requirements
---------------------------

Build backends MUST NOT include dependency group data in built distributions.

When installing the current package (``.``) from a dependency group, tools
SHOULD prefer editable installs over non-editable installs. They MAY provide
users with options to configure this behavior.

Use of Dependency Groups
------------------------

Tools which support Dependency Groups are expected to provide new options and
interfaces to allow users to install from Dependency Groups. Implementations

> may wish to treat them similarly to their current treatments of

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
may wish to treat them similarly to their current treatment of
```
Though this sentence feels very vague. If I was a tool author, I'm not sure what I would do with it.

Author: Yeah, let's strike the whole sentence.

I meant this based on my experience with tox, which allows either of these:
```ini
deps = -r test-requirements.txt
commands = pytest
```
or
```ini
extras = dev
commands = pytest
```

and all I wanted to say was that this PEP doesn't say _anything_ about how tox (or any other tool like it) should handle specification of dependency groups.

would be:

.. code:: shell

    pip install --dependency-groups=test,typing

Note that this is only an example. This PEP does not declare any requirements
for how tools support the installation of Dependency Groups.

Reference Implementation
========================

There is currently no reference implementation/consumer of this specification.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

At time of writing, the ``requirements`` namespace within a
``pyproject.toml`` file is unused. Since the top-level namespace is
reserved for use only by standards specified at packaging.python.org,
there should be no direct backwards compatibility concerns.

Security Implications
=====================

This PEP introduces new syntaxes and data formats for specifying dependency
information in projects. However, it does not introduce newly specified
mechanisms for handling or resolving dependencies.

It therefore does not carry security concerns other than those inherent in any
tools which may already be used to install dependencies -- i.e. malicious
dependencies may be specified here, just as they may be specified in
``requirements.txt`` files.

How to Teach This
=================

> This feature should be referred to by its canonical name, "Dependency Groups".

Reviewer 4: ... which is very different from the entry you see in pyproject.toml, `requirements.packages`. Maybe one of the two should change.

Author: I'm going to be changing the table name to `[dependency-groups]` today. Which will force me to do some rewrites throughout.

I wanted to use `[project.dependency-groups]` but Paul very rightly pointed out that I then need to reckon with the fact that `project.name` and `project.version` are required when `project` is present. Even though I still like that name best, I think it's biting off more than I can chew.

list. Rather than asking pip to install from a ``requirements.txt`` file,
either pip or a relevant workflow tool will install from a named Dependency
Group.

For new Python users, they may be taught directly to create a section in
``pyproject.toml`` containing their dependency groups, similarly to how they
are currently taught to use ``requirements.txt`` files.
This also allows new python users to learn about ``pyproject.toml`` files
without needing to learn about package building.

For both new and experienced users, the special syntax used in PEP 735
Dependencies will need to be explained. Support for ``.`` and ``.[extra]``
should be taught similarly to teaching ``pip install -e .`` and
``pip install -e '.[extra]'`` -- it intentionally mirrors the effects of those
commands. Support for inclusion of one dependency group in another can be
taught as a homologue for one requirements file including another using ``-r``.

Rejected Ideas
==============

Why not define python-requires as part of the requirements table?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Discussion around :pep:`722` and :pep:`723`, as well as discussions of projects which

> do not produce wheels, have often raised the need to define the python version

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
do not produce wheels, have often raised the need to define the Python version
```

which will be used.

This PEP explicitly does not define such a key -- doing so must define
interoperability semantics with respect to the existing packaging-oriented

> python-requires key.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
``python-requires`` key.
```

This meets many development dependency needs, and clearly associates dependency
groups with relevant tasks which can be run.
These mechanisms are *good* but they are not *sufficient*.

First, they do not address the needs of non-package projects.

Second, there is no standard for other tools to use to access these data. This
has impacts on high-level tools like IDEs and Dependabot, which cannot support
deep integration with these dependency groups. (For example, at time of writing
Dependabot will not flag dependencies which are pinned in ``tox.ini`` files.)

Open Issues
===========

Section Naming
--------------

The name of the section is not yet finalized. The current proposal is
``[requirements.packages]``.

Some commenters have suggested that ``requirements`` should be avoided, and
others have suggested that ``requirements`` is fine but ``packages`` is too
vague/generic.

Syntax For Groups Including Groups
----------------------------------

One of the current outstanding concerns is that ``.[test]`` (an extra) and
``[test]`` (a dependency group) are too similar.

The syntax for Dependency Groups to refer to one another is not yet finalized.

References
==========

> .. _pip only-deps: https://github.com/pypa/pip/issues/11440

Reviewer 4: Generally better to inline such links to the place where they're used.

information in projects. However, it does not introduce newly specified
mechanisms for handling or resolving dependencies.

It therefore does not carry security concerns other than those inherent in any
tools which may already be used to install dependencies -- i.e. malicious
dependencies may be specified here, just as they may be specified in
``requirements.txt`` files.

How to Teach This
=================

This feature should be referred to by its canonical name, "Dependency Groups".

The basic form of usage should be taught as a variant on typical
``requirements.txt`` data. :pep:`508` package specifiers can be added to a named
list. Rather than asking pip to install from a ``requirements.txt`` file,
either pip or a relevant workflow tool will install from a named Dependency
Group.

For new Python users, they may be taught directly to create a section in
``pyproject.toml`` containing their dependency groups, similarly to how they
are currently taught to use ``pyproject.toml``.

Rejected Ideas
==============

Why not define python-requires as part of the requirements table?
-----------------------------------------------------------------

> Discussion around :pep:`722` and :pep:`723,` as well as discussions of projects which

Reviewer: Sorry, this was my typo:
```suggestion
Discussion around :pep:`722` and :pep:`723`, as well as discussions of projects which
```

There are two pre-existing solutions which are similar to this proposal: the
use of ``requirements.txt`` files and package extras.

Regarding ``requirements.txt``, many projects may define one or more of these files,
and may arrange them either at the project root (e.g. ``requirements.txt`` and
``test-requirements.txt``) or else in a directory (e.g.
``requirements/base.txt`` and ``requirements/test.txt``). However, there are
two major issues with the use of requirements files in this way:

* There is no standardized naming convention such that tools can discover or
  use these files by name.

* ``requirements.txt`` files are *not standardized*, but instead provide
  options to ``pip``.

Therefore, their use is not portable to any new
installer or tool which wishes to process them without relying upon ``pip``.
Additionally, ``requirements.txt`` files may be viewed as a heavyweight
solution for very small dependency sets of only one or two items, and a terser
declaration will be beneficial to projects with a number of small groups of
dependencies.

Regarding extras, the use of extras to define development dependencies is a

> widespread practice, but it has two major downsides.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
widespread practice, but it has two major downsides:
```

projects are designed or intended for this mode of distribution. Primary
examples include webapps (which often run from source), and data science
projects (which may start as collections of scripts and only later evolve
package structures). This PEP seeks to offer these projects a way to specify
their package dependencies in a way which is not constrained by the
requirements of distribution building -- for example, a data science project
does not need to declare a version or authors in order for these data to be
valid, nor does it need to define an installable package source tree.

Simultaneously, this PEP should benefit projects which *are* intended to build
distributions. Because these requirements data are explicitly defined to not be
included in any built distribution, two common use cases are addressed by this
addition:

* the use of ``extras``, as discussed above

* the use of ``requirements.txt`` files for distributed libraries and
  applications, which takes a similar form to their use in
  non-distribution-building projects

Rationale
=========

This PEP defines the storage of requirements data in lists within a
``[dependency-groups]`` table.

> This name was chosen to matche the canonical name of the feature

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This name was chosen to match the canonical name of the feature
```

("Dependency Groups").

This format should be as simple and learnable as possible, having a format
very similar to existing ``requirements.txt`` files for many cases. Each list
in ``[dependency-groups]`` is defined as a list of package specifiers. However,
there are a number of use cases which require data which cannot be expressed in
PEP 508 package specifiers. Therefore, this PEP also defines an object-format
for package specification, capable of defining these additional data.

The format does not support many forms of non-package data from
``requirements.txt`` files, such as ``pip`` options for package servers or
hashes. Including them in the initial stage complicates this proposal and it is
not clear that the majority of use-cases require them. Future expansions to

> this specification may enable the use of object declarations, rather than

Reviewer 4: The previous paragraph says we already have an object format. Should probably say something like "extend the object format".

This spec does not allow for such a structure. There is only one way to write
down a PEP 508 dependency, as a string. This has two positive effects:

* There are fewer ways of writing identical data

* It is not possible, by design, to combine a PEP 508 specifier with other
  key-value pairs in a dependency specifier

Specification
=============

This PEP defines a new section (table) in ``pyproject.toml`` files named
``dependency-groups``. The ``dependency-groups`` table contains an arbitrary
number of user-defined keys, each of which has, as its value, a list of
requirements specifiers (defined below).  These keys must match the following
regular expression: ``[a-z0-9][a-z0-9-]*[a-z0-9]``. Meaning that they must be
all lower-case alphanumerics, with ``-`` allowed only in the middle, and at
least two characters long. These requirements are chosen so that the
normalization rules used for PyPI package names are unnecessary as the names
are already normalized.

Requirements specifiers will use a definition based on standardized
`Dependency Specifiers <https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/dependency-specifiers/>`__
introduced in :pep:`508`.

> This PEP also proposes an object format to define a dependency, called a "PEP

Reviewer 4: I would recommend against using the PEP number in the permanent name of this feature.

735 Dependency" (defined below). The elements in ``[dependency-groups]``
lists must either be strings, in which case they must be valid Dependency
Specifiers or else PEP 735 Dependencies.

PEP 735 Dependencies
--------------------

PEP 735 Dependencies are objects which define a set of dependencies. They do
not necessarily refer to a single package, as will become clear from the
definitions below.

There are two forms of PEP 735 Dependencies: "Dependency Group Includes" and
"Path Dependencies".

Dependency Group Include
''''''''''''''''''''''''

A Dependency Group Include includes the dependencies of another Dependency
Group in the current Dependency Group.

An include is defined as an object with exactly one key, ``"include"``, whose

> value is a string, the name of another Dependency Group.

Reviewer 5: Could this possibly be made a list? Just asking, maybe I've missed a discussion.

Author: There hasn't been discussion of this yet.
I think a list is pretty near equivalent, but I was concerned that it's adding work for implementers without adding much value for users.

I'd like to leave it as a string for the moment, but I'll add this to open issues so that it doesn't slip from discussion.

Reviewer 6: Let's keep non-editorial discussion separate from this PR, and in the discuss.python.org thread for this PR please.

For example, ``{include = "test"}`` is an include which expands to the
contents of the ``test`` Dependency Group.

Path Dependency
'''''''''''''''

A Path Dependency is a dependency on a package found via a local filesystem
path OR on dependencies of a package found via a local filesystem path.

It contains the following keys, with associated types:

* ``path``: a string, required
* ``extras``: a list of strings, optional
* ``editable``: a boolean, optional
* ``only_deps``: a boolean, optional

For a simple example, ``{path = ".", editable = true, extras = ["mysql"]}`` is
a Path Dependency on the current project including its ``mysql`` extra. In
``requirements.txt`` files, a similar idea can be expressed as ``-e .[mysql]``.

``path``
~~~~~~~~

> The ``path`` must refer to the path to a built distribution (wheel, sdist, or

Reviewer 4: I assume this path is relative to the directory that the current `pyproject.toml` is in. That should be made explicit.

package. Implementations MAY refuse to process ``path`` directives which are
not packages, even when ``only_deps`` is specified (see below for how
``only_deps`` would potentially make it possible to process non-package paths).

``extras``
~~~~~~~~~~

The ``extras`` key is a list of strings, each of which is the name of an extra
which should be included in the package installation.

``editable``
~~~~~~~~~~~~

If ``editable`` is ``true``, implementations installing the dependency group
SHOULD install the dependency in editable mode. If it is ``false``, they SHOULD
install it in non-editable mode. If ``editable`` is absent, no default behavior
is specified and implementations may choose their preferred default.

Implementations MAY provide options to users to configure or override this behavior.
For example, a tool may have an option ``--never-editable`` which always treats
``editable`` as ``false``.
However, implementations SHOULD prefer to use the ``editable`` value if it is
present.

If ``editable`` is specified on a Path Dependency which refers to a built
distribution, implementations MUST treat this as an error.

> ``only_deps``

Reviewer 4: Nit: I think a hyphen (`only-deps`) is more consistent with other parts of pyproject.toml, e.g. this PEP's own `dependency-groups` table.

Author: Done! (Although, aside: based on the discussion that field might be going away anyway. It seems I misunderstood the needs which prompted it.)

    [project.optional-dependencies]
    types = ["typing-extensions"]

Note how ``test`` and ``typing`` refer to the current package while ``docs``
does not. This reflects the ability of Dependency Groups to be used in the same
manner as extras, adding to dependencies, or completely independently.

``typing-test`` is defined as a union of two existing groups, plus an
additional package. ``typing`` includes an extra, ``types``, and this is
included by extension under ``typing-test``.
Under ``typing-test`` implementations may choose whether or not to use an
editable installation of the current package or not, but they MUST treat
``only_deps`` as ``false``.

Package Building
----------------

Build backends MUST NOT include dependency group data in built distributions.

Use of Dependency Groups
------------------------

Tools which support Dependency Groups are expected to provide new options and
interfaces to allow users to install from Dependency Groups.

No syntax is defined for expressing the dependency group of a package, for two
reasons:

* it would not be valid to refer to the dependency groups of a third-party

>   package from pypi (because the data is defined to be unpublished)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  package from PyPI (because the data is defined to be unpublished)
```

* there is not guaranteed to be a current package for dependency groups -- part
  of their purpose is to support non-package projects

For example, a possible pip interface for installing dependency groups
would be:

.. code:: shell

>     pip install --dependency-groups=test,typing

Reviewer 7: Could this document also include examples of combining this with `--constraint` which is how pins/lockfiles would env matrixes would practically be defined (perhaps, generated with pip-tools, for example).

Reviewer 8: Like @ofek I’m a strong -1 on this feature being used for locking. Specifically, dependency groups should never contain transitive dependencies, and so even with constraint files, won’t explicitly record the exact list of things to install.

An example of using dependency groups for something that works a bit like a lockfile would be misleading as to the intended use of the feature, IMO.

Author: My expectation is that tools like `pip-tools` would grow the ability to turn dependency groups into lockfiles. So I could definitely add an example of that.

Perhaps the best interface to document with respect to dependency locking is something like Poetry or PDM. These tools take more ownership of the file layout than pip-tools, so they know where the lockfile data is stored. That allows commands like
```
$TOOL install-group test
```
which implicitly reads the locked dependency group data, rather than pyproject.toml

Reviewer 7: @pfmoore to be clear, I didn't mean to imply that the dependency groups should contain pinned or transitive deps. I rather expected something like `pip install --dependency-groups=test,typing --constraint=pip-tools-made-test-n-typing-lock.txt`.

@sirosen yes! That's my understanding, too — `pip-tools` should be taught to understand how to retrieve the dependency groups. As it's already able to get extras and extract the build deps, there already are mechanisms in place that would enable it to grab deps from another source relatively easily.

I don't think the PEP should advertise any lockfile layout, though. Not until there's a separate PEP that defines it.

Reviewer 6: Let's keep non-editorial discussion separate from this PR, and in the discuss.python.org thread for this PR please.

there should be no direct backwards compatibility concerns.

Security Implications
=====================

This PEP introduces new syntaxes and data formats for specifying dependency
information in projects. However, it does not introduce newly specified
mechanisms for handling or resolving dependencies.

It therefore does not carry security concerns other than those inherent in any
tools which may already be used to install dependencies -- i.e. malicious
dependencies may be specified here, just as they may be specified in
``requirements.txt`` files.

How to Teach This
=================

This feature should be referred to by its canonical name, "Dependency Groups".

The basic form of usage should be taught as a variant on typical
``requirements.txt`` data. Standard dependency specifiers (:pep:`508`) can be
added to a named list. Rather than asking pip to install from a
``requirements.txt`` file, either pip or a relevant workflow tool will install
from a named Dependency Group.

For new Python users, they may be taught directly to create a section in
``pyproject.toml`` containing their dependency groups, similarly to how they
are currently taught to use ``requirements.txt`` files.

> This also allows new python users to learn about ``pyproject.toml`` files

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This also allows new Python users to learn about ``pyproject.toml`` files
```

There are two pre-existing solutions which are similar to this proposal: the
use of ``requirements.txt`` files and package extras.

Regarding ``requirements.txt``, many projects may define one or more of these files,
and may arrange them either at the project root (e.g. ``requirements.txt`` and
``test-requirements.txt``) or else in a directory (e.g.
``requirements/base.txt`` and ``requirements/test.txt``). However, there are
two major issues with the use of requirements files in this way:

* There is no standardized naming convention such that tools can discover or
  use these files by name.

* ``requirements.txt`` files are *not standardized*, but instead provide
  options to ``pip``.

Therefore, their use is not portable to any new
installer or tool which wishes to process them without relying upon ``pip``.
Additionally, ``requirements.txt`` files may be viewed as a heavyweight
solution for very small dependency sets of only one or two items, and a terser
declaration will be beneficial to projects with a number of small groups of
dependencies.

Regarding extras, the use of extras to define development dependencies is a
widespread practice, but it has two major downsides:

> * An extra is defined as an additive group of dependencies for a package.
>   This means that it cannot be installed without installing all of the package

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* An extra is defined as an optional part of a package which may specify
  additional dependencies.
  This means that it cannot be installed without installing all of the package
```

Had a look at the PEP 508 wording, feel free to dismiss.

  dependencies, and the project must be defined as a package.

* Many developers view their extras as part of the public interface for their
  package. Because these are published data, package developers often are
  concerned about ensuring that their development extras are not confused with
  user-facing extras. Therefore, their development needs are not appropriate to
  publish in the manner of extras.

Providing a standardized place to store dependency data which matches the
typical use cases of ``requirements.txt`` files will allow for better
cross-compatibility between tools and will onboard beginning users into
``pyproject.toml`` data more quickly (before they learn about the

> ``build-system`` table, for example). It will also resolve the long-standing

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
``[build-system]`` table, for example). It will also resolve the long-standing
```

dependencies. They do not necessarily refer to a single package, as will become
clear from the definitions below.

There are two forms of Dependency Object Specifiers: "Dependency Group Includes"
and "Path Dependencies".

Dependency Group Include
''''''''''''''''''''''''

A Dependency Group Include includes the dependencies of another Dependency
Group in the current Dependency Group.

An include is defined as an object with exactly one key, ``"include"``, whose
value is a string, the name of another Dependency Group.

For example, ``{include = "test"}`` is an include which expands to the
contents of the ``test`` Dependency Group.

Path Dependency
'''''''''''''''

A Path Dependency is a dependency on a package found via a local filesystem
path OR on dependencies of a package found via a local filesystem path.

It contains the following keys, with associated types:

* ``path``: a string, required
* ``extras``: a list of strings, optional
* ``editable``: a boolean, optional
* ``only-deps``: a boolean, optional

For a simple example, ``{path = ".", editable = true, extras = ["mysql"]}`` is
a Path Dependency on the current project including its ``mysql`` extra. In

> ``requirements.txt`` files, a similar idea can be expressed as ``-e .[mysql]``.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
``requirements.txt`` files, a similar idea can be expressed as ``-e '.[mysql]'``.
```

does not. This reflects the ability of Dependency Groups to be used in the same
manner as extras, adding to dependencies, or completely independently.

``typing-test`` is defined as a union of two existing groups, plus an
additional package. ``typing`` includes an extra, ``types``, and this is
included by extension under ``typing-test``.
Under ``typing-test`` implementations may choose whether or not to use an
editable installation of the current package or not, but they MUST treat
``only-deps`` as ``false``.

Package Building
----------------

Build backends MUST NOT include dependency group data in built distributions.

Use of Dependency Groups
------------------------

Tools which support Dependency Groups are expected to provide new options and
interfaces to allow users to install from Dependency Groups.

No syntax is defined for expressing the dependency group of a package, for two
reasons:

* it would not be valid to refer to the dependency groups of a third-party
  package from PyPI (because the data is defined to be unpublished)

* there is not guaranteed to be a current package for dependency groups -- part
  of their purpose is to support non-package projects

> For example, a possible pip interface for installing dependency groups

Reviewer 5: Should this term always be capitalized?

Author: I'm not 100% sure, but I think it should be in the PEP.
If the PEP is accepted, we should get used to it appearing without being title-cased, but within the PEP I think it should be consistently title-ized.

Author: I've applied the change to title-case it in all circumstances.

tools which may already be used to install dependencies -- i.e. malicious
dependencies may be specified here, just as they may be specified in
``requirements.txt`` files.

How to Teach This
=================

This feature should be referred to by its canonical name, "Dependency Groups".

The basic form of usage should be taught as a variant on typical
``requirements.txt`` data. Standard dependency specifiers (:pep:`508`) can be
added to a named list. Rather than asking pip to install from a
``requirements.txt`` file, either pip or a relevant workflow tool will install
from a named Dependency Group.

For new Python users, they may be taught directly to create a section in
``pyproject.toml`` containing their dependency groups, similarly to how they
are currently taught to use ``requirements.txt`` files.
This also allows new Python users to learn about ``pyproject.toml`` files
without needing to learn about package building.
A ``pyproject.toml`` file with only ``[dependency-groups]`` and no other tables
is valid.

For both new and experienced users, the object style used in Dependency Object
Specifiers will need to be explained. Support for

> ``path = ".", editable = true`` and
> ``path = ".", editable = true, extras = ["extra"]`` should be taught

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
``{path = ".", editable = true}`` and
``{path = ".", editable = true, extras = ["extra"]}`` should be taught
```
I've seen this is used in a few other places in the text (not the examples), too.

Earlier drafts of this specification defined syntactic forms for Dependency
Group Includes and Path Dependencies.

However, there were three major issues with this approach:

* it complicates the string syntax which must be taught, beyond PEP 508

* the resulting strings would always need to be disambiguated from PEP 508
  specifiers, complicating implementations

* support for the matrix of Path Dependency requirements (``editable``, ``only-deps``,
  ``extras``) would require a complex syntax whose design was unclear

Why not restrict dependencies to PEP 508 only?
----------------------------------------------

There are known use cases for:

* including one Dependency Group in another
* including the current package (if the project is a package)
* including the current package with extras (if the project is a package)
* installing ``project.dependencies`` from the current project but not
  installing the current project (as can be done with
  ``{path = ".", only-deps = true}``)
* specifying that an installation be done in editable mode

These are not satisfiable without some expansion of syntax beyond what is

> possible with exsting Dependency Specifiers (:pep:`508`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
possible with existing Dependency Specifiers (:pep:`508`).
```
